(a) Limitations on disconnections. After notice and hearing, the Commission may issue an order that may include limitations on disconnection of residential utility service used or needed for the primary heating or cooling source.
(b) Temporary ban on disconnections. The Commission shall have the authority to order a temporary ban on any or all disconnections during periods of extremely severe weather or when circumstances exist such that disconnection could create a situation dangerous to the life or health of consumers or to property.
(c) Severe weather.
(1) If the NWS issues a local forecast predicting the temperature will drop below 32 degrees Fahrenheit for any time period during the following twenty-four (24) hours, the utility shall suspend its disconnection of service if the electric service is used for heating purposes. The utility must obtain the most recent local forecast for the customer's location from the NWS reports between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the morning of the day that the customer's shut-off is scheduled. If the NWS issues an updated forecast on the day of disconnection, then such updated forecast shall be used in place of the earlier obtained forecast.
(2) If the NWS issues a local forecast predicting the heat index will be 101 degrees Fahrenheit or higher on the day of disconnection, or if the actual heat index is 101 degrees Fahrenheit or higher, the utility shall suspend its disconnection of service activity if the electric service is used for cooling purposes. The utility must obtain the most recent local forecast for the customer's location from the NWS reports between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the morning of the day that the customer's shut-off is scheduled. If the NWS issues an updated forecast on the day of disconnection, then such updated forecast shall be used in place of the earlier obtained forecast.
(3) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a utility from establishing a higher temperature threshold for residential heating purposes below which it will not discontinue utility service or from establishing a lower temperature threshold for residential cooling purposes above which it will not discontinue utility service. The utility may continue to disconnect utility service for unauthorized use of the utility's measuring equipment or tampering with wires, pipes, meters, or any other utility equipment or obtaining service without contract.
(d) Financial assistance delay. When a residential consumer has applied for and is awaiting financial assistance, including social security income, from a federal, state, or local social service agency, and the utility has initiated written notice of disconnection, it shall delay disconnection of service for a period of at least twenty (20) calendar days from the date when such notice was either delivered or mailed to the premises where service is rendered, provided:
(1) The reason for disconnection is for nonpayment of the utility bill.
(2) The consumer has notified the utility that the consumer has applied for and is awaiting financial assistance.
(3) Verification from the involved agency must be provided in a form as prescribed by the utility upon its request.
(4) If the expected financial assistance is less than the amount owed for services, the utility may require the consumer to enter into a deferred payment agreement as prescribed pursuant to (e) of this Section.
(5) Under no condition is the utility required to furnish service to the consumer unless there is a reasonable expectation of payment for such service except where other rules of this Commission apply.
(e) Deferred payment agreement. The utility shall be required to offer a deferred payment agreement before disconnecting service when a residential consumer is unable to pay an account in full. The utility shall not disconnect service for nonpayment of a bill if the consumer enters into a deferred payment agreement with the utility. The utility shall mail, or by electronic notification to customers who make an affirmative election to receive electronic notification of such, a confirmation of the terms of the deferred payment agreement if it is made orally. A deferred payment agreement may be entered into by the consumer up to, but not including, the day of disconnection. Except where payment assistance for the total amount of the bill is pending, the utility may require a reasonable partial payment in accordance with paragraph one (1) of this subsection, at the time the deferred payment agreement is made.
(1) Deferred payment agreement means a just and reasonable agreement offered by the utility and agreed to by the consumer which provides for the payment of all future bills during the period of agreement by the due date and the payment of the balance of any outstanding bills in reasonable installments based upon:
(A) Consideration of the consumer's gross income.
(B) Size of the delinquent account.
(C) Consumer's ability to pay.
(D) Consumer's payment history with the utility.
(E) Length of time and reasons why the debt has not been paid.
(F) Other extraordinary expenses of the consumer.
(G) Loss of income through unemployment or illness.
(H) Any other relevant factors concerning the circumstances of the consumer.
(2) The payments under such an agreement need not be equal in amount.
(3) The consumer shall initiate renegotiation prior to breach of the deferred payment agreement. The deferred payment agreement shall be renegotiated if financial circumstances, such as loss of income through unemployment or illness or any other relevant factors concerning the circumstances of the consumer, change during the payment period.
(4) If a consumer fails to comply with the terms of the deferred payment agreement, the consumer will be subject to disconnection without further notice, so long as the disconnection date on the first and second notice has not been passed. If the disconnection date has passed, the utility shall provide at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice of disconnection to the consumer.
(5) Under no condition is the utility required to furnish service to the consumer unless there is a reasonable expectation of payment for such service except where other rules of the Commission apply.
(f) Life-threatening situation.
(1) For purposes of this Section, a life-threatening situation is defined as one where the consumer or other permanent resident of the household is dependent upon equipment that is prescribed by a physician, operates on electricity, and is needed to sustain the person's life. Examples of life-sustaining equipment would be: kidney dialysis machine, iron lung, oxygen concentrators and certain other oxygen machines, cardiac monitory, heating and air conditioning equipment, or any other equipment that is prescribed by a licensed medical doctor. If the life-sustaining equipment without a battery backup is prescribed by a licensed medical doctor, then it shall be considered life-sustaining equipment. The following are not considered to be life-sustaining equipment: hot water heater, refrigerator, range/stove, nebulizers that are battery-driven or hand-driven or self-contained, battery-driven sleep apnea monitors, battery-driven cardiac monitors.
(2) When a consumer to whom service is provided is unable to pay the account in full, the utility shall suspend discontinuance of service, or reconnect if disconnected, if the consumer notifies the utility that disconnection of service will give rise to a life-threatening condition for the consumer or other permanent resident of the household should electric service be terminated, and within thirty (30) calendar days of the initial notification, the consumer shall return the Medical Certificate described in (3) of this subsection.
(3) The consumer shall use a Medical Certificate Form which verifies the existence of a life-threatening situation. The form shall be provided by the utility at no cost to the consumer. The form shall provide certification by a licensed medical doctor or osteopath. The consumer may choose the appropriate medical personnel. At a minimum, the Medical Certificate Form provided by the utility shall contain, substantially, the information in the form as set forth in Appendix A to this Chapter. The service account name holder shall sign the Medical Certificate Form at the appropriate space, indicating knowledge that a permanent resident of the household is applying for the life-threatening situation certificate and further acknowledging the responsibility for payment of bills rendered for electric service.
(4) Completion of (2) and (3) of this subsection will suspend disconnection of electrical service to the specified residence for a period of thirty (30) calendar days from the initial notification. This 30-day period allows the consumer, if eligible, to pay the account in full or enter into a deferred payment agreement with the utility and/or make alternative arrangements for the person(s) named on the certified form as having the life-threatening condition. After thirty (30) calendar days, normal collection action will resume. The 30-day period may be extended by the utility at the request of the service account name holder for one (1) additional contiguous 30-day period, but only if necessitated by the life-threatening condition (as indicated on the Medical Certificate Form). The request for the additional 30-day extension must be made before the end of the initial 30-day period. The utility is not required to furnish service to the consumer beyond a total of sixty (60) calendar days for the life-threatening condition without full payment of the account or acceptable payment arrangements on any unpaid balance.
(5) Verification of the medical condition of the consumer or other permanent resident in the household by the utility may include the following:
(A) Utility personnel may visit the consumer's residence with the consumer's permission to verify that life-sustaining equipment is being used.
(B) Utility personnel may verify the doctor's signature and clarify the medical terms of the diagnosis which is the reason for the life-threatening certificate.
(6) This collection abeyance in no way absolves the consumer from full responsibility for the payment in full of the utility services rendered, and is intended for the purpose of providing the consumer an opportunity to maintain service during the life-threatening situation within the prescribed time frames.
(7) Failure of the service account name holder to fully comply with this subsection may result in denial of life-threatening status and renewed collection activities of the utility, to include termination of service to said residence.
(8) Any consumer who uses this subsection to avoid disconnection or for reconnection of service and does not complete the required documentation will be subject to disconnection.
(9) A consumer is not prohibited from claiming life threatening situation once full payment of the account balance from a previous life-threatening claim is made and a Medical Certificate Form signed by a licensed medical doctor has been received by the utility.
(g) False information. If a consumer provides false or misleading information to the utility to avail the consumer of the provisions applicable to the financial assistance delay, deferred payment agreement, life-threatening situation, or Commission notification procedure for elderly and/or consumers with disabilities, the false information shall be grounds for disconnection of service by the utility. The utility may disconnect service upon the utility providing notice to the customer in accordance with OAC 165:35-21-20(a).
(h) Consumer liability. Reconnection or continuance of service under this Section shall not in any way relieve the consumer of the consumer's liability incurred for utility service.