(1) Customer-directed. A utility may require customers to give at least three days' advance notice of customer-directed disconnection when the utility uses
dispatched utility personnel to disconnect service. The utility may
require up to twenty-four hours advance notice of customer-directed
disconnection from customers serviced via a meter with remote disconnect capability. The customer is not responsible for usage after the
requested date for disconnection of service, provided the customer
gave the utility the notice required in this rule and the utility's
tariff. If the customer moves from the service address and fails to
request that service be disconnected, the customer will be responsible
for paying for service taken at that service address until the utility
can confirm the date that the customer vacated the premises and the
utility can access the meter, if necessary, or that a new responsible
party is taking service at that address.
(2) Utility-directed with notice. After notifying the customer as
required in subsection (4) of this section, the utility may disconnect
service for any one of the following conditions:
(a) The customer has delinquent charges associated with regulated
electric service, including any required deposit; however, the utility
may not disconnect service when the customer has met the requirements
of subsection (8) of this section for medical conditions or emergencies, or has agreed to and maintains agreed-upon payment arrangements
with the utility, as described in WAC 480-100-143, Winter low-income
payment program;
(b) Electric service the utility provides is being used for pur-
poses or properties other than those specified in the customer's serv-
ice application;
(c) Flat-rate service for nonmetered load has increased electric
use without the utility's approval;
(d) The customer refuses to allow, or utility representatives are
otherwise unable to obtain, access to the customer's premises as required in WAC 480-100-168, Access to premises; identification;
(e) Violation of utility rules, service agreements, or filed tariff(s); or
(f) Equipment is being used that detrimentally affects the utili-
ty's service to its other customers or may result in detrimental im-
pacts to the safety of those customers or other persons, customers'
equipment or property, or utility service.
(3) A utility may not disconnect electric service for amounts
that the customer may owe the utility for nonregulated service.
(4) Disconnection notification requirements. The utility must notify a customer as provided in this subsection before disconnecting
the customer's service, except as described in subsection (7) of this
section.
(a) The utility must provide at least two separate disconnection
notices to the customer.
(i) The utility must provide the first disconnection notice in
writing by delivery of a paper copy to the service premises. The utility must either mail a paper copy of the notice or deliver the notice
to the service premises by attaching the notice to the customer's primary door. The notice must be mailed or delivered to the premises at
least eight business days before the disconnection date. If the notice
is mailed from outside the states of Washington, Oregon, or Idaho, the
utility must mail the notice eleven days before the disconnection
date. In addition, the utility must provide an electronic copy of the
notice, if the utility has such contact information for the customer
and the customer has consented to electronic delivery of notices from
the utility, at the time the utility mails or delivers the paper copy
of the notice.
(ii) The utility must provide the second disconnection notice
electronically (if the utility has such contact information and customer consent to electronic delivery of notices) at least two business
days before the disconnection date and by one of the three options
listed below:
(A) Delivered notice. The utility must deliver a paper copy of
the second notice to the service premises and attach it to the customer's primary door at least two business days before the disconnection
date.
(B) Mailed notice. The utility must mail a paper copy of the second notice at least three business days before the disconnection date
unless mailed outside of the states of Washington, Oregon, or Idaho,
in which case the utility must mail the notice no less than six business days before the disconnection date.
(C) Telephone notice. The utility must attempt at least two times
to contact the customer by telephone during regular business hours at
least three business days before the disconnection date to enable sufficient time to send a timely written notice if the utility is unable
to speak with the customer by telephone. The utility must keep a log
or record of the calls for a minimum of ninety calendar days showing
the telephone number called, the time of the call, and details of the
results of each attempted call. If the utility is unable to speak with
the customer by telephone, the utility must deliver or mail a paper
copy of the second notice as provided in (a)(ii)(A) or (B) of this
subsection.
(b) Each disconnection notice must include all relevant information about the disconnection action including:
(i) The cause for disconnection, the amount owed for regulated
electric service, and how to avoid disconnection including, but not
limited to, the availability of, and how to apply for, energy assistance, low-income assistance, exemptions for low-income assistance and
medical conditions or emergencies, and a payment plan as required un-
der WAC 480-100-138 Payment arrangements;
(ii) All relevant information about any charges that the utility
is assessing or that it may assess;
(iii) The utility's name, address, and toll-free telephone number
by which a customer may contact the utility to discuss the pending
disconnection of service;
(iv) If the notices are for nonpayment and the utility is scheduling disconnection during the late fall and winter between November
15th and March 15th, the utility must advise the customer of the pay-
ment plan option in WAC 480-100-143 Winter low-income payment program;
and
(v) If the utility may be disconnecting service via a remote dis-
connection device, the notice must include a statement that the utili-
ty may disconnect the customer's service without a final visit from
utility personnel.
(c) If the utility discovers that an issued notice does not contain the information required under (b) of this subsection, or if the
information in the notice is inaccurate, the utility must issue another notice to the customer as described in (a)(i) or (ii) of this sub-
section, as applicable, and must recalculate the scheduled disconnection date to the extent necessary to ensure that the utility complies
with the minimum prior notice requirements.
(d) If the utility does not disconnect service within ten business days from the disconnection date stated in a disconnection notice
under (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection, the utility must restart the
disconnection notice process required in (a) of this subsection unless
the customer and the utility have agreed to a payment arrangement.
(e) A utility with combined accounts for both natural gas and
electric service may disconnect the electric service in compliance
with these rules if the reason for the disconnection applies or is attributable to that service. The utility may disconnect the natural gas
service in compliance with chapter 480-90 WAC if the reason for the
disconnection applies or is attributable to that service. The utility
must state which service it intends to disconnect and any measures the
customer needs to undertake to retain the other service. If the utili-
ty seeks to disconnect both services, the utility must distinctly
identify both services it intends to disconnect.
(f) When the service address is different from the billing address, the utility must determine if the customer of record and the
service user are the same party. If they are not the same party, the
utility must provide notice to the service user as described in (a) of
this subsection prior to disconnecting service.
(g) Except in case of danger to life or property, the utility may
not disconnect service on Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, or on
any other day on which the utility cannot reestablish service on the
same or following day.
(h) Any representative the utility dispatches in connection with
service disconnection must accept payment of a delinquent account at
the service address, but will not be required to give change for cash
paid in excess of the amount due and owing. The utility must credit
any over-payment to the customer's account. The utility may charge a
fee for the disconnection visit to the service address if provided for
in the utility's tariff.
(i) When the utility provides service through a master meter, or
when the utility has reasonable grounds to believe it is providing
service to a person other than the customer of record, the utility
must undertake reasonable efforts to inform the occupants of the service address of the impending disconnection. Upon request of one or
more service users, where service is to a person other than the cus-
tomer of record, the utility must allow at least five days past the
original disconnection date to permit the service users to arrange for
continued service.
(j) Medical facilities. The utility must take the following additional steps when the utility is aware that it is providing service to
specified types of medical facilities.
(i) If the utility is providing service to a hospital, medical
clinic, ambulatory surgery center, renal dialysis facility, chemical
dependency residential treatment facility, or other medical care facility licensed or certified by the department of health (DOH), the
utility must provide a notice of pending disconnection to the DOH secretary and to the customer. Upon request of the DOH secretary or designee, the utility must delay the disconnection for at least five
business days past the original disconnection date to allow DOH to
take the necessary steps to protect the interests of the patients re-
siding at the facility.
(ii) If the utility is providing service to a nursing home,
boarding home, adult family home, group care facility, intermediate
care facility for individuals with intellectual disabilities, intensive tenant support residential property, crisis residential center
for children, or residential care facility licensed or certified by
the department of social and health services (DSHS), the utility must
provide a notice of pending disconnection to the DSHS secretary and to
the customer. Upon request of the DSHS secretary or designee, the
utility must delay the disconnection for at least five business days
past the original disconnection date to allow DSHS to take the necessary steps to protect the interests of the patients residing at the
facility.
(iii) A utility may not remotely disconnect customers who the
utility is aware provide the services described in (j)(i) and (ii) of
this subsection, and the utility must take reasonable precautions to
prevent any unauthorized disconnection of those customers.
(k) Any customer may designate a third party to receive a disconnection notice or notice of other matters affecting the customer's
service. The utility must offer all customers the opportunity to make
such a designation. If the utility has reasonable grounds to believe
that a customer is not able to understand the effect of the disconnection, the utility must take reasonable steps to ascertain whether a
third party, such as DSHS or other social services agency, is responsible for the customer's affairs. In either circumstance, the utility
must delay service disconnection for at least five business days past
the original disconnection date after issuing a disconnection notice
to the third party. The utility must determine which social services
agencies are appropriate and willing to receive the disconnection no-
tice and the name and/or title of the person able to deal with the
disconnection, and the utility must provide that information to the
customer.
(5) For purposes of this section, the date of mailing a notice
will not be considered the first day of the notice period.
(6) Remote disconnection. When disconnecting services remotely,
the utility must:
(a) Disable remote disconnection functionality for medical facilities and critical infrastructure as identified in or pursuant to
the Washington state military department's Washington state infra-
structure protection plan; and limit the number of remote disconnections in a twenty-four hour period or take other reasonable measures
to prevent unauthorized disconnections;
(b) Perform all remote disconnections for nonpayment between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. and remotely disconnect service only
if the utility provides customers with a reasonable opportunity to
submit payment and have the utility reestablish service on the same
day;
(c) Prior to involuntarily disconnecting a customer who has a
medical certificate in accordance with subsection (8) of this section,
visit the customer's premises and provide the customer with an opportunity to pay via appropriate methods including providing payment to
the dispatched utility representative;
(d) Prior to disconnecting a customer for nonpayment who the
utility is aware has received low-income assistance in the prior two
years, visit the customer's premises and provide the customer with an
opportunity to pay via appropriate methods including providing payment
to the dispatched utility representative;
(e) If a site visit is not required to disconnect the service,
the utility may not charge any fees for the disconnection.
(7) Utility-directed disconnection without prior notice.
(a) A utility may disconnect service without prior notice or
without further prior notice under any of the following circumstances:
(i) After conducting a thorough investigation, the utility determines that the customer has tampered with or stolen the utility's
property, has used service through an illegal connection, or has fraudulently obtained service. In any challenge to that determination, the
utility has the burden of proving that fraud occurred. For the purpose
of this section, a nonsufficient funds check or dishonored electronic
payment alone will not be considered fraud.
(A) First offense. The utility may disconnect service without
prior notice when it discovers theft, tampering, or fraud, unless the
customer immediately pays all of the following:
(I) The tariffed rate for service that the utility estimates was
used as a result of the theft, tampering, or fraud;
(II) All utility costs resulting from such theft, tampering, or
fraud; and
(III) Any required deposit.
(B) Second offense. The utility may disconnect service without
prior notice when it discovers further theft, tampering, or fraud. The
utility may refuse to reconnect service to a customer who has been
twice disconnected for theft, tampering, or fraud unless the commis-
sion determines otherwise.
(ii) After conducting a thorough investigation, the utility determines that the customer has vacated the premises;
(iii) The utility identifies a hazardous condition in the custom-
er's facilities or in the utility's facilities serving the customer;
(iv) A customer pays a delinquent account with a check or electronic payment the bank or other financial institution has dishonored
after the utility has issued notice as required in subsection (4) of
this section;
(v) The customer has not kept any agreed-upon payment arrangement
for payment of a delinquent balance after the utility has issued no-
tice as required in subsection (4) of this section; or
(vi) The utility has determined a person has used service prior
to applying for service. The utility must charge the person for service used in accordance with the utility's filed tariff. If the utility
has reasonably sufficient grounds to conclude that the unauthorized
usage is in good faith, the utility should notify the person and provide an opportunity to apply for service prior to disconnection.
(b) If the utility disconnects service without prior notice as
authorized in this subsection, the utility must subsequently make a
reasonable effort to notify the customer or affected person of the
reason for the disconnection within five business days. Such notice
must also describe the means by which the customer or person may dispute the utility's actions including, but not limited to, contacting
the commission.
(c) This section should not be interpreted as relieving the customer or other person of civil or criminal responsibility.
(8) Medical conditions or emergencies. When the utility has cause
to disconnect or has disconnected a residential service, it must postpone disconnection of service or must reinstate service for a grace
period of five business days after receiving either verbal or written
notification of the existence of a medical condition or emergency that
requires electricity to continue to be provided. The utility must reinstate service during the same day if the customer contacts the utility prior to the close of the business day and requests a same-day re-
connection. Otherwise, the utility must restore service by 12:00 p.m.
the next business day. When service is reinstated the utility will not
require payment of a reconnection charge and/or deposit prior to reinstating service but must bill all such charges on the customer's next
regular bill or on a separate invoice.
(a) The utility may require that the customer, within five business days, submit written electronic or paper certification from a
qualified medical professional stating that the disconnection of electric service would aggravate an existing medical condition of an occu-
pant of the household. "Qualified medical professional" means a licensed physician, nurse practitioner, or physician's assistant author-
ized to diagnose and treat the medical condition without supervision
of a physician. Nothing in this section precludes a utility from accepting other forms of certification, but the most the utility can re-
quire is written electronic or paper certification. If the utility requires such written certification, it may not require more than the
following information:
(i) Residence location;
(ii) An explanation of how the current medical condition will be
aggravated by disconnection of service;
(iii) A statement of how long the condition is expected to last;
and
(iv) The title, signature, and telephone number of the person
certifying the condition.
(b) The medical certification is valid only for the length of
time the health endangerment is certified to exist but no longer than
sixty days, unless renewed.
(c) A medical emergency does not excuse a customer from having to
pay delinquent and ongoing charges. The utility may require the customer to do the following within a five business day grace period:
(i) Pay a minimum of ten percent of the delinquent balance;
(ii) Enter into an agreement to pay the remaining delinquent balance within one hundred twenty days; and
(iii) Agree to pay subsequent bills when due. Nothing in this
section precludes the utility from agreeing to an alternate payment
plan, but the utility must not require the customer to pay more than
this subsection prescribes. The utility must send a notice to the customer confirming the payment arrangements within two business days of
having reached the agreement.
(d) If the customer fails to provide a medical certificate in accordance with (a) of this subsection or ten percent of the delinquent
balance within the five business days grace period, or if the customer
fails to abide by the terms of the payment agreement, the utility may
disconnect service after complying with the notice requirements in
subsection (4)(a)(ii) of this section. If the utility previously provided a second disconnection notice to the customer, the utility must
provide an additional second disconnection notice in compliance with
the notice requirements in subsection (4)(a)(ii) of this section.
(9) Payments at a payment agency. Payment of any past-due amounts
to a designated payment agency of the utility constitutes payment when
the customer informs the utility of the payment and the utility has
verified the payment. The utility must promptly verify the payment
upon notification from the customer.
(10) Remedy and appeals. A utility may not disconnect service
while the customer is pursuing any remedy or appeal provided by these
rules or while engaged in discussions with the utility's representatives or with the commission. Any amounts not in dispute must be paid
when due and any conditions posing a danger to health, safety, or
property must be corrected. The utility must inform the customer of
these provisions when referring the customer to a utility supervisor
or to the commission.
(11) Disconnecting service during inclement weather. A utility
must establish conditions in its tariff(s) under which the utility
will cease nonvoluntary service disconnections during inclement weather events.